alltran (Allen Tran), dagr (David Grant)

Grading note:
  We do not pass the Python script. For some reason, xk stops responding on the 13th crash.

1. What's the purpose of the super block? What fields are in the super block?

The super block holds block numbers that indicate the start of each region on disk.
We use the superblock when we want to access a disk block in a region given an offset.

struct superblock {
  uint size;         // Size of file system image (blocks)
  uint nblocks;      // Number of data blocks
  uint swapstart;    // Block number of swap region
  uint bmapstart;    // Block number of first free map block
  uint inodestart;   // Block number of the start of inode file
  uint extentstart;  // Block number of the start of extents region
};

2. What's the purpose of the disk bitmap?
The bitmap keeps track of which disk blocks are being used in the file system. Each bit represents a disk block.

3. Explain how dirlookup works.
Takes in a directory inode and reads the dirent contents in a linear search over all of the contents of the directory until it finds a dirent with a matching name otherwise it fails.
If the correct dirent is found, it will return the inode pointer to the inode associated with that dirent.

4. File delete is not a required feature in lab5. Describe how you can implement it in a crash-safe manner even if the file spans multiple blocks.
To delete a file, we have to remove the dinode, inode, and dirent entries.
Removing the inode, we decrement its ref count until it gets deallocated.
Set up a write-ahead transaction:
To remove the dinode entry, we zero out the dinode entry in the inode file's data block.
To remove the dirent entry, we zero out the dirent entry in root's data block.
Then modify the bit map to deallocate the data blocks (lazy deletion).
End transaction.

5. Support for multi-block write is not required in lab5. Describe how to extend your current implementation to support it.
Multi-block write would be implemented as a sequence of one block atomic and crash safe write transactions in the write-ahead log. The write-ahead log would have to support multiple transactions.

6.
Allen : ~40h

David: same.
